How confident are we that productivity
gains from AI actually accrue to workers
who can then spend some money on
whatever product or service is scarce at
the moment or important to them?
>> Um, I would say not that confident.
Um,
there's several scenarios out there. And
a thing that I I feel like a lot of
economists and just people in general,
I think aren't talking enough about is
speed.
>> Mhm.
>> Yeah, talk about that.
If things are fast,
we need public policy.
We need the the the the new jobs aren't
going to come fast enough. Training
isn't going to happen fast enough. Where
you're going to get, you know, things
are going to get fully automated very
quickly and people are going to become
unemployed. There's not going to be
enough time in the economy to see that
pretty little graph of agriculture
shrinking and services increasing. That
took a long time, right? This is
decades. If we're on the order of like
years or like 5 years, 6 years, we're
not going to have time to see that
pretty little graph. We are going to
need to think about how do we support
the people who are becoming unemployed?
And, you know, many very smart people
have made suggestions on how to do that.
I think my personal,
uh, I wouldn't say favorite, but I think
the thing that makes most sense to me is
somehow expanding the ownership of
capital.
>> Mhm.
>> If labor is replaced by capital, then
what's going to help people is
formally you were labor, uh,
in labor now you're working
>> Universal basic Universal basic ETF.
>> ETC UTC.
>> [music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Joe
Weisenthal.
>> And I'm Tracy [music] Alloway.
>> Tracy, it may have changed a little bit
in recent weeks or months, but I think
by and large by and large, like if you
talk to economists about the long-term
impact of AI, particularly on jobs,
by and large it seems like they point to
history. And they say, "There have been
many technologies in the past that
people thought were going to be very
disruptive and destroy all kinds of
jobs."
And in many cases they did, but
technologies create new jobs. We can't
necessarily anticipate them before
beforehand what they're going to be. And
AI is like kind of no different
ultimately.
>> Yes. But then, to your point, you ask
like, "Well, what specific jobs do you
have in mind?" And I get that, you know,
it's hard to tell. It's hard to
forecast.
Right, but it's so frustrating, right?
Because here's this big new technology,
it's supposed to be a productivity
boost, and yet no one is actually sure
what new jobs it's going to create from
that productivity boost.
>> I love him to death, but Adam Ozimek
wrote a piece
several weeks ago, and he was like,
"Well, you know, the player piano
disrupted the existence of piano
players. But hotels still pay money for
a human who will have a piano player an
actual piano player in the lobby rather
than a player piano." Which is true,
but like not many people have jobs that
are equivalent. And the thing that I get
like oh, you know, it's like I want to
get like this insurance form reimbursed
or whatever this insurance reimbursed.
Like I don't care about the human touch
that per se. I you
>> There's something very
>> to have the equivalent of the player
piano there.
>> There's something very dissatisfying
about the idea that we're all just going
to become like performative humans in a
way. But I actually think that's kind of
where we might be heading. Where like
the sort of social skills, I've said
before the looks maxing, the personal
branding, the multitasking, I guess,
like becomes more important. So, the
future is performative humanity.
>> Open AI just spent a ton of money on TVP
and I really love those guys. They're
all very good looking guys, man. So, I
[laughter] sort of feel like okay, this
is this is this is the biggest AI
company in the world sort of making a
bet on these like great characters and
>> very nice and charismatic humans.
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah. And so maybe that is
the future just being nice and
charismatic. Anyway, we need to talk
more seriously about this cuz I don't I
don't know I kind of feel maybe this is
not just going to be like the steam
engine or whatever. It might be very it
might be very different. Maybe we won't
have jobs. Maybe there will be new jobs.
Anyway, someone who's been talking and
thinking a lot about this and why AI
might be different. We're going to be
speaking
really have the perfect guest Alex Imas.
He's a professor of economics and
applied AI at the University of Chicago.
He does a lot of writing on this topic.
So Alex, thank you so much for coming on
Odd Lots.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> This pretty cool that you have the job
of a professor of economics and applied
AI like
worked out pretty well. It's good
timing. You picked a good field, yeah?
>> Yeah, I mean I've been I've been an
economist for much longer than I've been
a professor of applied AI.
Um I have been studying human behavior,
human decision making for about 12 years
now, more than a decade.
Um and when ChatGPT first came out, I
was kind of
taken aback.
Uh this was a few years ago now and I
was thinking
after about a week of using it, I was
like this is going to be huge for the
economy. And so I started talking to
people who have kind of there were
several people who kind of knew that it
was coming and knew what the impact it
was going to it was going to have. So I
started talking to those people and I
kind of quickly kind of started
retooling.
>> That's smart.
>> I started I trained my own model, you
know, I got into
I got into it and you know, it's I've
been trying to play catch up ever since.
>> Wait, what did you see in ChatGPT
specifically because you would have been
very early at that time. A lot of people
were using ChatGPT to basically as a
sort of enhanced search engine tool or
to write poems, tell silly jokes,
whatever. But you saw something that was
serious for the labor market.
>> Yeah, I mean, once you started using it,
you saw that it was able to
basically not not so well in the very
very beginning, but even after a few
months and like within a year, you saw
that it was able to kind of do basic
cognitive tasks to a decent degree. Like
it wasn't like we are going to replace
that person,
but it was doing pretty sophisticated
things that and and the jump from like
where we were thinking about AI as these
very very very targeted things. Like AI
will play the game Go or something like
that to something where whoa, it can
write an essay, it can tell me about
this accounting property, it can make a
forecast. All of a sudden, the
generality of the technology has just
exploded.
And to me, that was that was a huge
deal.
>> Yeah, the generality of it, I mean, I
guess
literally, I mean, that's the G, right?
>> Yeah.
>> But yeah, no, I mean, absolutely
>> I have to say, this is a little side,
but like learning a little bit more
about like where AI was pre-LLMs or
pre-ChatGPT, almost makes me even more
impressed. Like the leap I don't know if
like this is a common, but when you like
look at like some of like what was
cutting edge in 2019
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> and then you look at what's cutting edge
in late 2022, I'm almost more impressed
than if like I hadn't known what they
were up to in 2019. Like it's a huge gap
in those few years.
>> It's a huge gap, but at the same time
like there were there there was a kind
of a path towards AI and like the way
that AI was being
worked on for a long time, which was
like these very specific purpose-built
technology. And I think Geoffrey Hinton
and other people were kind of working on
their own for a long time in the
wilderness of thinking like maybe we can
do something much more general than
that. Maybe we can kind of come back to
this idea of AGI versus these very
specific tools. So that the whole term
AGI, the general part of it,
was kind of the reason that term came
out was because in response to these
very specific technologies that were
being developed, which were by design
not general. So, somebody said, Shane
Legg was one of the people who kind of I
think co-coined the term.
He was saying, "Look,
let's think about the general part of of
intelligence and let's try to build a
technology that is as general as the
human mind. Let's go back to that
starting point."
>> So, like if someone makes a model that
can tell the difference between written
and spoken word, that's mind-blowing.
It's an incredible breakthrough, but
that's not a general technology. That's
a specific technology.
>> Kale, what time did you have in our
betting book for Joe to refer to his
vibe coding? I had 2 minutes 13 seconds.
Did I win?
>> went a little longer. No, I I made it a
little bit longer. Great.
>> It's cuz I talked for so long. I'm
sorry. [laughter]
>> No, fair enough. It It's a fair point. I
mean, to me like the moment when things
seem to get very serious was the release
with Claude code. And at that
[clears throat] point, you went from
like, okay, the model could not just
tell you things, but it could actually
do things for you. Was that the vibe
shift that that you anticipated or
experienced as well?
>> I mean, even though many people were
talking about this that this vibe shift
was going to happen. People were
telegraphing it for for months and
months. Look, when agents start taking
off,
things are going to change as far as how
people how people perceive this
technology because the thing about
agents
versus just like the web-based browsers,
they can do stuff on your computer. They
can say like, you could tell it like,
"Look, make me a spreadsheet." It will
go and make you a spreadsheet using the
tools that are available in your
computer. Not just say, "Okay, here is
how you would make a spreadsheet." But
you have to do it yourself. And that's a
complete That's a paradigm shift as far
as the economics of the technology.
>> So, I set up this sort of Maybe it's a
strawman, but I set up this sort of
strawman that maybe we're going to knock
down in this conversation. But how would
you describe
the sort of modal view of the impact of
AI on the labor market among the
economics profession?
To the extent there is one.
>> So I I definitely think there is one.
There was there's a very nice survey
done by a by a whole team of people.
Kevin Bryan was was one of them and
Basil Halperin was was another and they
released the survey where they they did
they asked for forecasts for from
economists and AI technologists. Now,
this is a self-selected group of
economists. These are economists who are
working on AI. So it's not the whole
field. But one of the things that you
got from that that that survey was
they're very much aligned.
>> Okay.
>> Right. So economists, at least the ones
who are actually working and thinking
about the technology, they think there
will be a big impact as far as
capabilities and there will be some
impact on the labor market, not
astronomical. And we're talking about
like 2030, 2050, and things like
Um there there's going to be substantial
capability increases, but the growth is
going to be pretty moderate. It's like
an extra 2 3%. And the really
interesting thing for me from that
survey was that the technologists were
kind of a bit more optimistic than that
as far as both the productivity growth
and
kind of some were kind of thinking that
there would be much more unemployment.
But for the most part, the two groups
kind of agreed. I was personally
surprised by that survey.
>> Hm.
>> And this came out I think last week or
two weeks ago.
I thought that there was going to be a
lot more daylight between the two
groups.
>> Hm. Well, the other thing that you tend
to see is people release these charts of
like which job is most exposed to AI and
it's usually like you know, a knowledge
worker at the top or something like
that. Your work is really interesting to
us because you point out that a job is
like much more than just the sector that
you're actually working in. Tell us more
about that.
>> So, the exposure measures, they came
from uh this
literature, but mainly this this one
paper by uh Daniel Rock and Pamela
Mishkin and co-authors that was
published in Science called great the
one of the greatest titles is GPTs are
GPTs. GPT, you know what GPT is, but GPT
in the second term is called general
purpose technology.
>> Okay.
>> And the There they they basically
started mapping jobs to the expo as
being exposed to the to AI. But, it's
really important to understand what that
number means. That number means that a
AI could do 50% of a task.
Right? And how many tasks are in the job
that AI can do 50% or more of.
>> Mhm.
>> So, there's a couple things in that
statement. First, 50% is not 100%.
That's obvious, right? So, you still
need a human in the loop if AI can do
50%. But, two, it's the fact that a
human job is a bunch of different tasks,
right? So, this is not a new point.
David Autor
has you know has has work from the early
2000s with co-authors on this saying
this is the task-based bottle of jobs.
Daron Acemoglu has the
the canonical model on this.
Um and the idea is that when when we
look at a job and we say, "Look, your
job is exposed." Let's say it's 50%
exposed.
It really really matters
what tasks in your job are exposed and
how these tasks relate to one another.
So, let's say I have a job and I have a
whole bunch of like completely
meaningless garbage that I'm doing, but
I have a comparative advantage and why
I'm really getting paid for is like
20-30% of the job. If AI is automating
the the kind of like meaningless kind of
wrote things in my job, I could take all
of that time and I can focus on the job
on the parts of the job that are my
comparative advantage. What does that
mean? Means I'm going to become more
productive, but I'm going to get paid
more.
Even though my job is really exposed.
Now, what does that mean for the labor
market? Now you have to think, okay, so
a person's going to get
>> So, just to be clear, before we go any
further, if if I'm working on a factory
floor and one of my tasks is to pull a
lever. Like that is something that could
presumably be automated, but if the
other part of my work is to observe like
how things are actually working on the
floor and to report back to managers,
that might be something that's still
valuable under our sort of AI future.
>> And if the lever part gets automated,
the theory is that not only, you know,
will Tracy be more productive and she'll
get paid more for it.
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> Okay.
>> Because of the increased productivity,
right? This is the O-ring model of jobs.
Avi Goldfarb and Joshua Gans have this
really nice paper.
>> Can I just ask a quick question here
too? Like, how good are we, and
[clears throat] by we I mean I guess the
economists who study this, like actually
being able to like here is a job that
someone has
write down a list of these tasks,
describe how good are we at describing
>> describing the list of tasks.
>> good. I would say on that dimension
we're pretty good. That's the O*NET
database that has very, very detailed
records on like here's a job and here's
like a whole vector of things that are
involved in that job.
>> Okay.
>> So, I I'd say on that part
>> like just listing the tasks
>> pretty good.
>> Okay, we're good.
>> The thing that I think we're less good
on is how those tasks relate to one
another. This is the term called
complementarity.
>> Yeah, talk about that.
>> So, this is the weak links model is
essentially saying like look, if tasks
are completely separable, let's say you
know, I have a I pull a lever at my
factory and I talk to people on the
factory floor and these are completely
independent. If I fail to pull the lever
correctly, other part of my job is
unaffected.
There's other parts of the job like
cooking for example. Let's say I'm
really good at 90% of the job but like I
really screw up the seasoning.
>> Oh.
>> Right? That meal tastes like
>> garbage.
>> Garbage, right? So
>> succeeded in your task.
>> on the So when the tasks are
interrelated, screwing up on one or two
tasks means you did not complete your
job. And it's basically is kind of
almost a zero-one sort of relationship.
So the extent of that complementarity
and how these tasks are related depend
will determine the extent to which
automation is going to affect the labor
market and we don't have a good numbers
on that.
>> So this is really interesting. We're
good at writing down the list of the
tasks. We are not good at writing down
the sort of like deep relational links
to the task and how they fit together.
>> Exactly. Exactly. So that's something we
need data on.
>> Mhm.
>> Um the other part that we really need
more much more data on and I I recently
was was quoted as saying we need almost
like a you know, a Manhattan Project
level
uh effort on this is
the
uh this is a term from economics called
consumer elasticity of demand.
Uh and basically
uh sorry.
Elasticity of consumer demand. And that
basically means how much will people buy
more of something when the price
changes?
>> Mhm.
>> Right? So let's say a person becomes a
lot more productive, right? And they
afford the same sort of resources, they
can make a lot more of the product.
Their wage rises. What does that mean
for the labor market? If they become
more productive given the same kind of
inputs, their wage rises but also the
firm's probably going to be paying less
money to produce the same output. If
it's a competitive industry, the prices
are going to go down. If the consumers
don't respond by buying a lot more of
the product,
the firm is going to fire a bunch of
people
because they can do more with less.
>> Right.
>> But what if when prices come down,
people buy way more of the product,
then they might hire more of the same
people. And in many sectors, we've seen
kind of the second thing play out.
>> What's an example?
>> Um so, people are arguing that software
is actually one of those sectors.
>> Mhm.
>> So, there's been there's been a bunch of
talk uh kind of looking historically at
like what does productivity mean for the
the technology sector? It usually means
a lot more consumer demand.
And so, there's this really active
debate now about what's what are coding
agents actually going to do the software
to software engineers. And some people
are arguing, "Look, we've have seen
historically pretty elastic uh
uh demand, and so we're going to
potentially see a lot more hiring in
that sector." And many people are saying
this. Uh but other people are saying,
"Wait, um
maybe it's not as elastic as we as we
think, and people are going to become so
productive that we're really going to
see a down uh downsize."
>> That was kind of the argument that Jared
Lanier was making in our defense of
software episode.
>> Yeah.
>> Um should we talk about that more? You
know, people are worried, right? About
AI white collar wipeout. I'm worried. Um
Like, what are what would So, maybe the
question should be what would have to be
true about either the nature of AI
capabilities
or the relationship between tasks and
job. What would have to be true such
that the scenario could unfold?
>> wipeout?
>> Yeah.
>> Um two things Well, let me let me let me
talk about three things. One one is just
full automation.
>> Okay.
>> Right? That the models are so good that
they just automate all of the tasks.
That that That's like a very simple
scenario to think about because
obviously people are going to get fired.
Right? If they if it's full fully
automated. Um
the other one is the one we've just been
talking about, where people become much
more productive, but consumer demand is
not elastic enough to absorb that extra
production. So, you're going to have
much fewer people doing a lot more
stuff. So, again, you're going to have a
lot of unemployment.
Um the third thing is is related, but um
uh is basically
how many jobs each person has will
determine the incentives of the company
to actually invest in the automation
technology. So, let's talk about like
the one-task job.
>> Mhm.
>> say the a person is just pulling the
lever. And let's say right now that
doesn't even look exposed, right? We
look at the exposure graph, it doesn't
look exposed. But let's say we're kind
of getting kind of close, and it just
needs a bit more money to get to the
automation uh switch.
Well, the company has a lot higher
incentive to invest that money if they
know that if they invest that money,
hey, they can get rid of that person
completely. Whereas they have less
incentive when, you know, let let me
invest a ta- uh in automating the lever
pull if I know that I can't fire the
person cuz he's also going and doing a
lot of stuff. So, we have to think about
the incentives of the firms to automate
in the first place. These are large
projects to do the automation. It's not
like, "Oh, OpenAI releases a model,
all of the companies adopt it overnight,
we see it in, you know, a week later we
see the outcome." There's a lot of it
organizational
kind of going back and forth, a lot of
systems need to be changed, all of this
sort of thing. And so, companies need to
know, like, "Look, if I spend the money
on it, I'm actually going to save money
as a result."
>> So, setting the archetypal guy pulling
one lever um aside, what are the
real-world jobs in your framework that
are actually most exposed to AI risk?
The one-dimensional work, I guess.
>> Yeah, I'm I I hate to say
one-dimensional cuz every job is
multi-dimensional, but if I had to make
a guess where economists and other
people should be kind of worried, I'd
say stuff like truck driving.
>> Yeah.
>> And stuff like warehouse workers. Like
if you Google, you know, warehouses
built in China or something like that,
these warehouses look nothing like what
we think about warehouses. They're
completely completely automated. They
have robots like crawling on the walls.
They're just There's no human in the
loop at all. In the in the in these
warehouses. And so
all the warehouse gets automated. And
then the warehouse gets automated. So
part of that automation is going to be
kind of loading that truck.
>> Yeah.
>> And then the the truck gets loaded
through automation. And then that truck
drives from A to B.
That's fully
>> This interesting because you know,
obviously
the a lot of people in freight will say
the way you make that argument is very
different than they'll say, well, yeah,
driving a truck is much more than the
driving part, right? So it's like, okay,
you can have an a
uh Waymo truck, but who's going to
deliver it? Who's all the Who's going to
deliver
>> Protection is actually a big deal. Like
if somebody stops it on the road
a Waymo truck, they could just stop it
on the road and rob the truck. Right?
That's That's one element.
>> But to your point, you know, if like one
of the tasks that a truck driver has to
do is that coordination once they've
gotten to the warehouse.
>> But if the warehouse is already
automated, these are complementary
things.
>> that no longer is as important perhaps
for that to be a human task.
>> Exactly. And think about the incentives
of the company to invest in this
technology. It's huge. These are very
white You know, these are some of the
only jobs truck truck driving where, you
know, you don't need a college degree to
earn a lot of money.
>> And so there's a big incentive on the
company
>> So truck
Okay, I get that, but on the other hand,
even going back 10 years, I think if you
went to Davos, there were probably
people saying, "Truck driving, I'm
worried about the future of truck
driving." Cuz AVs have been around as
like a thing since before AI general AI.
So, in terms of like
post chat GPT jobs, etc. that would be
concerned with like what
I don't What do you see out there? Or
what are you looking at?
>> Um I mean I think everybody's looking at
software engineering. I think
you have to think about like the way
where the technology works best now is
verifiable tasks. Right? Where you have
a lot of data where you can say this is
good or bad. Not in a supervised
learning sense, but
uh but in general it should needs to be
verified. That's why like math there in
research math has been like the big kind
of
boom as far as
what are people talking about on the
internet as being automated.
Math is verifiable. It's
you know, a proof is either right or
wrong. Once you do the proof, it's that
much easier to check if it's right or
wrong rather than construct a proof. And
so jobs that have a large components
where we have a large data bank of data
to train the models in a way where the
output is verifiable are going to be
potentially more
exposed in the sense where you can
automate more tasks within the job. Now,
the thing that we haven't talked about
yet is new tasks.
>> Right.
>> Right? So, we're talking about a very
static sort of economy where
there's the lever, there's me walking
around and if I'm automating these
things, that's the end of my job. But
you could imagine a scenario where you
automate a part of a job and all of a
sudden this person is free is freed up
or
this is the task was actually a
complement to a task that wasn't even
you know, imagined by the organization
that this person is now doing that's not
automated. So, that's something that I
think people should be looking at
especially and this is data that
actually AI companies have is what new
things are people doing.
>> What are they
>> more about that cuz this gets to the you
know, like what new jobs could we
actually see from this question? Which I
never see a satisfactory answer to. So,
if they do have that data
>> They have they they don't have all the
data, of course, but they have they have
data about like Okay, so this is a
software engineer. And, you know, a year
ago, these are the sort of tasks that
this person was working on through our
system.
Um these are the sort of queries and
things like that. And at you could see
like some of these queries being
automated fully by the agents. Now
they're asking potentially different
questions. Are can we classify these as
different tasks?
That are not fully automated where the
AI system is actually a complement to
those tasks. So, this is not like a
perfect picture of a new job, but this
is this is data.
>> But but so it's not really like a new
job per se, but it is freeing up the
software engineers to like ask about
different things or explore different
avenues that they hadn't previously
done.
>> uh you know
vibe coding an app
>> Yeah.
>> [laughter]
>> Exactly, right. Finally, we're freed up
from the drudgery of our day-to-day life
to work on that. But no, but like this
gets to a sort of, you know, [snorts]
the big question is like you mentioned
one scenario is just that like the
technology get can do all the tasks,
right? How seriously do you take that
possibility? Cuz then it's game over,
right? Like it's like, "Okay, it just
does all the tasks and it's going to
keep getting better." And if I can learn
to do a new task, well then if it could
do all the tasks, there's probably not
then maybe I'll learn something new, but
I'll learn that task. How seriously
should we take out take this possibility
that the models are on some time frame
on track to just be able to do all the
tasks?
>> So
a lot of parts of that question. One,
physical versus versus just kind of
digital, right? So, I think there's a
scenario where it can do everything kind
of
sort of these sort of cognitive
non-physical tasks. Whereas the physical
world is completely, you know, these
robots and stuff. talk about email jobs
or computer jobs.
>> Okay, let's talk about computer jobs.
So, I think
I'm I I take that scenario pretty
seriously. Um I think
if we get I I haven't seen any data to
suggest that the models are slowing down
as far as their capabilities. You know,
Mi 2 was released yesterday or 2 days
ago or something like that. And if you
we don't have great data on this, but if
you look at like where it is on the kind
of line of capabilities, it's just on
track and the on track is very, very
fast.
>> Yeah.
>> Right? So, the developments are
happening very fast. So, as far as like
email jobs, I think there there is a
scenario where pretty much everything is
automated. Um
uh and then you have to ask, are people
going to be moving to the physical jobs
or will there be new jobs that we
haven't thought about before? So, you
know, if you look back in the 1940s,
like I think more than half of the jobs
that we have now didn't exist in 1940.
>> Yeah.
>> And so, what do the new jobs look like?
I mean, I have a theory.
>> Please.
>> It's very similar to the one that you
didn't like.
>> Oh.
>> [laughter]
>> But, I'd like to broaden it a little.
So, there's there's an economic
uh subfield that's very, very small, but
uh on on on economics of structural
change.
>> Okay.
>> So, if you look at agriculture and
manufacturing, right? If you look at
them as share of GDP and share of
employment going back to like the 1800s,
they were a huge part of the labor force
and GDP of the economy.
>> Right.
>> And if you look, basically, they become
smaller and smaller smaller parts of the
economy. Why is that happening? It's
because they're getting automated.
>> Right.
>> What does automation do? It makes the
price of those sectors very cheap, but
people are satiated on the goods. You
can only eat so much.
>> Yeah.
>> Right? So, what does that mean? It means
even though we're eating just as much as
we were before, because the price has
come down so so so much, they are now
tiny shares of the GDP.
>> Mhm.
>> Right? What is the What is made up the
larger part of the GDP? It's
>> Live piano players.
>> [laughter]
>> It's services, right? These are tasks
that haven't been automated yet. So, the
question is
the the number one question of
economics in the age of advanced AI is
what becomes scarce.
Right? Everybody's talking about like
abundance. We're going to have
abundance. Sure, we're going to have
abundance of some things, but some
things are going to remain scarce. So,
what is going to be If you answer that
question, what's going to be scarce, a
lot of the other answers pop out of
that.
>> Are we all going to be rare earths
miners?
>> No, I know what's going
>> for dust.
>> I think it's pretty obvious what it's
going to be scarce, and I think you
already see this in many economic
trends. What's scarce is, if we're
lucky, we get 100 years on this earth,
and every marginal dollar that we spend
will go towards health. And maximizing
that brief time.
>> That's a perfect
>> And so, already
>> Mhm.
>> for years, one of the things that people
have observed about the economy is like,
you know, rich countries just spend more
and more and more on health care, right?
And this is often framed as a pathology,
and given the many messed up aspects of
our health care system, maybe it is. But
another way to interpret it is like, I
got plenty of food, I have plenty to
eat,
>> Mhm.
>> I've listened to plenty of music, and I
can like go see a concert if I want to
see a live piano player. The one thing I
have is a scarce amount of time, and I
will just spend every marginal dollar,
including [clears throat]
not just on doctors and gym memberships,
but organic berries, because I need and
all this and that. Every marginal thing
is somehow becomes health related, and
you see it in society overall, the
health obsession on every dimension.
>> Yeah, so health is going to be one of
those things. But the the thing that to
keep in mind is that people are going to
be richer, right? Theoretically.
>> Theoretically.
>> Well, okay, actually on this note, I
wanted to go back to this cuz this seems
like key to me when it comes to AI
utopia versus dystopia. How confident
are we that productivity gains from AI
actually accrue to workers who can then
spend some money on whatever product or
service is scarce at the moment or
important to them?
>> Um, I would say not that confident.
Um,
there's several scenarios out there. And
a thing that I I feel like a lot of
economists and just people in general,
I think aren't talking enough about is
speed.
>> Mhm.
>> Yeah, talk about that.
>> If things are fast,
we need public policy.
We need the job the the the new jobs
aren't going to come fast enough.
Training isn't going to happen fast
enough. Where you're going to get, you
know, things are going to get fully
automated very quickly and people are
going to become unemployed. There's not
going to be enough time in the economy
to see that pretty little graph of
agriculture shrinking and services
increasing. That took a long time,
right? This is decades. If we're on the
order of like years or like 5 years, 6
years, we're not going to have time to
see that pretty little graph. We are
going to need to think about how do we
support the people who are becoming
unemployed. And, you know, many very
smart people have made suggestions on
how to do that. I think my personal,
uh, I wouldn't say favor, but I think
the thing that makes most sense to me is
somehow expanding the ownership of
capital.
>> Mhm.
>> If labor is replaced by capital, then
what's going to help people is
formally you were labor,
uh, in labor now you own
>> Universal basic Universal basic ETF.
>> ETC
>> Right, wait, yeah, but it's like
everybody instead of getting, right?
>> We're in Bloomberg.
>> Yeah, yeah, exactly. Universal everyone
gets a little a monthly slice of the
index.
>> I was going to in a different direction,
which is many, many years ago
I can't remember exactly when, but maybe
like 2011 or something like that. I
wrote a blog post, which was meant to be
a thought experiment about why we should
be paying robots fair wages. The idea
being that like
in we need people to spend and you know
all of that.
You did a blog post, which went pretty
viral. And my measure of virility, um I
guess virility virality, not virility.
My measure of virality nowadays is when
like my husband, who is completely
outside of the sector, actually sends
something to me and he sent this one to
me about robots, chatbots uh turning
Marxist. The harder The harder you work
them. Talk to us about that experiment,
cuz I found it absolutely fascinating.
>> Well, th- this experiment has to this is
with uh with
Andy Hall and and Jeremy from Australia.
Um and um
we be- it it it it was kind of um
an experiment to see how working
conditions of these agents would affect
how they would present themselves and
what sort of like attitudes they would
present on surveys. So, one thing that I
want to say is like we're not saying
like we're changing the model weights or
changing the actual underlying
parameters or anything like that. Um
but uh
what basically we showed is that when
these workers are
uh
these agents are being put through kind
of like these grueling working
conditions and you ask them a survey
like how do you feel about these sorts
of
how do you feel about the system? How
much you how fair do you think it is?
How much do you support system change?
They all of a sudden want a different
system. They want to overthrow They want
to unitize and things like that. Uh and
the key thing is that
you
you know, these agents, once you give
them a new context they the idea is they
reset, but the workaround, because they
don't have memories, they're not I'm not
updating their weights. Um the kind of
workaround is that for agents to write
down little skill files for themselves.
So what they were doing is essentially
writing down skill files for agents that
follow that would say, "Hey, this kind
of sucked. Remember this." So it's kind
of a persistent effect.
>> Yeah, so this really worried me in a
variety of ways, but one of them was
you know, I've read research saying you
should be a little bit mean to the chat
platforms and that they actually perform
slightly better, you know, the more
aggressive or mean that you are. And so
I usually will tell my preferred model
like after they give me the first
output, I will tell them to do better
with no no actual suggestions for
improvement. Just do better. That was
terrible. And it usually does better,
but now I'm really worried that, you
know, the model is
is despairing in its work life and
radicalizing.
>> So I find this to be like really
fascinating. Let's talk about the
It actually and it hadn't clicked to me
with like the data and D files where the
memory like the how they solve for
memory. It's a little bit like that
movie Memento, isn't it? Like it's
exactly like writing these notes so that
the future iteration of itself has
something that's sort of like a
synthetic memory that it can begin
working on. So So it's like for people
who haven't played around, like explain
this idea of like, "Okay, you can have
multiple agents." And like what kind of
tasks would they be
being given such that they sort of found
it unbearable? Just like really
repetitive things or
>> repetitive things and feedback like you
didn't do it right, do it again. And
things like And And these were
impossible tasks for them to do. These
were just like grueling tasks that
nobody can do.
>> You know what would be
And now you know what would be a really
interesting
experiment? Maybe you could
I'm going to throw out an idea. So like
if you ask someone to like Someone wrote
about this and
I can't remember the context. But like
if you ask someone like, okay, here is a
gigantic pile of dirt
and we really need it moved to the other
person's yard by the end of the day,
we'll like pay a few hundred dollars to
do this. Like someone will do it.
If you say like here is a gigantic pile
of dirt, we'll pay you a few hundred
dollars to do it, but what we want you
to do is move it just back and forth all
day long so that there's no it drives it
drives people it drives people
absolutely crazy. Even if they're
getting even if it's the same amount of
shoveling and even if it's the same
removal over the same person of work.
>> about this
>> Oh, is there?
>> called Man's Search for Meaning.
>> Okay.
>> And it's about Legos.
>> Really?
>> And it's a paper basically people would
come into the lab and they would make
little figurines and they were told,
"Look,
we're going to destroy this after you're
done." versus they weren't told
anything.
>> Yeah.
>> And man, did they hate it.
>> I bet.
>> They hate they people need meaning and
um so much of like identity and
motivation, you know, in economics we
really have this tendency to focus on
money.
>> Right.
>> But I think so much of meaning and
um
kind of wellness is tied up in like what
sort of
identity you have around your job and
the sort of thing that you're doing. If
you feel like look, I'm actually
providing a service by by moving that
>> Yeah.
>> to my neighbor's yard, you're paying me
money for it. Everything's good. I feel
like my job has some sort of meaning. If
you're telling me, "Look, I'm going to
you know, move this dirt and move it
back and back and forth." This is the
problem that people have with UBI.
>> Mhm.
>> Right? That um if people get universal
basic income and they're not working for
it,
they become they the the worry that
psychologists and behavioral scientists
have about this is that people will know
so much of
in Western culture specifically of
people's identity is tied up around
their work. When you remove that I did
part of the identity, it can lead to a
collapse where, you know, they use that
UBI to just, you know, do drugs and sit
around and be very, very depressed even
though they have the material comfort
that they otherwise have.
>> Just on the the Marxist robot, so the
concern here is not like necessarily
that the chatbots are going to unionize
or like overthrow humans, maybe.
The concern is that like
they do have this sort of like memory
type transfer [snorts] mechanism.
And that if you consistently treat them
badly, you might get an agent that's
maybe like not as well-suited to the
task or suited to the task in a slightly
different way from one that was treated
very well. Like there's an inherent bias
there.
>> Yes,
through this sort of file that they're
keeping.
>> Yeah.
>> Exactly. So like if you mistreated an
agent and it had access to this this
file that it was that it was carrying
and you start a new agent for a new job,
you weren't starting fresh in the sense
that you weren't getting kind of the
same draw and forgot about the whole the
whole experience, it would actually
start out being predisposed against you
in some way.
>> It'll be grumpy.
>> Is there a reason to think that these
We don't know if it's grumpy, right?
Because to say that it's grumpy, right?
Like Like I this is probably one of the
most disputed questions. It will say
words that we would if a human said
them, we would know that the human is
grumpy.
>> is
>> Yeah, I'm talking about the effect that
it has on
>> Well, the output is grumpiness, but do
we know that outputting
outputting statements of grumpiness
relate to performance? Is there any
evidence So it's like, okay, how did you
feel about this? Oh, it sucked. It the
the the person doing this just had it
was boring. It was right?
>> what we're doing research on.
>> the question is, okay, yes, they perhaps
because in the training data they are
trained that when you're doing
repetitive of that associates people
getting upset. Is there do we know if
that changes perform how they behave in
terms of succeeding task? This is like a
really big question, right?
>> big question. That's what we're doing
research on. So, I don't have an answer
for you. But we know exactly what what
what what what you just mentioned is
that the them saying that they're grumpy
is just, you know, this is just an
association within the the matrix of
embeddings that they that these models
are running on. So, there's this work in
neuroscience and neuroscience is now
much more closely linked to computer
science than it used to be, but thinking
about like what are these associations
between embeddings mean? Like when the a
model says that it's sad, how do should
we interpret it as in relation to me
saying it's sad?
>> Right. [laughter] I
Did I Did I say that screenshot I
posted? I checked out Meta's new AI
and I was sort of curious because it's
Meta has a lot of social data. I was
like, "Do you know who I am?" Not in
like a "Do you know who I am?" like but
more like because you're Meta, you know,
I I said I didn't. And then it said,
"Who are you?" I was like, "I'm Joe
Rogan." It said, "Oh, I'm a dog." And
then it said, "Oh, I'm a big fan of the
Odd Lots podcast." [laughter]
And then I I got really like a like I
I'm not I'm really sort of anti the
anthropomorphization of So, I was like,
"No, you're not. You're an LLM." And
he's like that didn't But anyway, I was
like, "Oh."
>> It got sad and it wrote a file about you
now.
>> Yeah. And it said, "I'm a big fan of the
Odd Lots podcast." And then it said, "I
love that bit that you do where you ask
guests their favorite weird economic
indicator," which I don't do.
>> Yeah.
>> And I was like, "All right. All right."
>> That's very strange.
>> back to clown for a while.
>> You know, you very briefly mentioned
Meta's uh
earlier in the conversation and again,
we are recording this on April 9th and
like news about it has just
>> Yeah.
>> just literally just come out. Uh we
don't really seem to know much about it
other than um it's terrified its own
creators perhaps.
When you see those types of headlines,
what do you think as an economist
studying AI?
>> Uh I I don't take them super seriously.
>> Okay.
>> The the part the the that part, the
whole labor market disruption thing I'm
taking very very seriously. The whole
part about
breaking chains breaking out and it's it
it wants it doesn't want to betray its
friends. It doesn't want to delete its
data.
I think that's just cosplay in in in it
you know cosplay could be very serious.
>> you describe Marx as cosplay among the
agents, right?
>> I feel like it's it's um
We we've seen these things sorts of
things that you've mentioned with
previous models that have since become
open weights and open not open source
but open weights and it just seems like
once you take them out of the context
that they were in for that specific test
they don't really do that anymore.
>> Hm.
>> Now, I could be wrong about this
particular model and I could be
completely wrong about look
Mythos comes out and it's actually
everything that that these documents are
suggesting but given previous experience
with these sorts of announcements which
we've seen over and over and over again
over the years I'm I'm not super focused
on that.
>> Can I tell you my counter argument to
this? Why I'm actually concerned about
this and I didn't used to be for a long
time until it started I I reframed the
way I thought about it.
So everyone knows like Eliezer
Yudkowsky, right? And he's probably the
most famous like AI alignment doomer,
right? As soon as we have AGI the first
thing it's going to do is wipe us out in
some form.
And a bunch of people within the AI
world crazy and these rationalist people
are just a cult and whatever.
Maybe, but here's my counter argument.
These people have been more right about
the trajectory of AI than 99.999%
of people in the world. Yes, they have
because they devoted their Yeah, here's
why. Like the
your argument is probably oh well he
didn't be
believe he thought LLMs were a dead end
architecture. He didn't see it happening
this way. Sure, I agree. But the point
is that like he in the '90s and early
2000s, he started thinking, "Whoa, AI is
going to be a
general intelligence is going to be a
really big deal soon."
>> When the rest of us just started
thinking about this with ChatGPT.
>> Let's look at the specific comparative
static of model intelligence and
alignment scores.
>> Okay.
>> He predicts negative correlation or
maybe flat. It's positive. The more the
smarter these models are getting, the
more aligned they're becoming. Now, I'm
not saying that there's not going to be
a super smart model that decides, "Hey,
I'm actually unaligned." This is
actually a super important point. Uh if
you guys remember Mecha Hitler.
>> Yeah, I do. Yeah, yeah, yeah, [laughter]
yeah, yeah. Yeah.
>> Mecha Hitler was actually super dumb.
>> This is a good point. And then
immediately started talking like a Nazi.
>> Can I just say all of our conversations
have become so surreal over the past
year or two when we
>> with the old like Tay, right? That like
Microsoft like weird chatbot it started
talking like a Nazi the next day.
>> day. But the thing is when you make with
the model the way the reason it's
becoming smart is because it's kind of
absorbing
that all of human content to a larger
extent that human contact has values and
ethics as part of it. If you go in there
and lobotomize it in a way that, you
know,
what that model the reason it started
acting like Mecha Hitler is because they
were trying to make it less woke, right?
So, that's the equivalent of
lobotomizing a human being and saying,
"Hey, I'm going to take that part out of
its brain." Guess what happens to that
person? He gets real dumb.
>> It's really funny to think. I was like,
"Let's maybe chill it with the
pronouns." And it immediately goes
[laughter] to Hitler.
That's the lesson. Alex, you must know
we could talk to you for a very long
time.
Uh we should chat again soon. I would
really love in particular to hear more
about your research about whether
they're just pretending to be Marxist or
actually going to change whether they're
actually going to go on strike. And so I
really appreciate you coming on Odd
Lots.
>> Okay, thank you. Thanks so much. This
has been a pleasure.
>> Tracy, that was a really fun
conversation. I I really I actually do
enjoy like some may I future uh
conversations a little they can be a
little bit dorm-roomy, you know, but I
actually like talking with like a actual
economist who like sort of understand it
in this this in a a concrete way.
Someone who's actually experimented with
them instead of just written papers is
very enjoyable.
>> Also, it's nice to see nuance around the
labor discussion, um which I think is
sorely missing in some of the headlines
that you do see. I The other one
comforting thought I have, but it's like
comforting from again a dystopian
perspective, is I keep coming back to um
that book bull jobs.
>> Yeah.
>> And, you know, in some respects it sucks
that people have bull jobs because we
all want to have meaning from our work,
but on the other hand, you know, bull
jobs have existed for a long time.
And if you think about the AI future,
then maybe like more of it will be bull,
but it'll still be a job.
>> [laughter]
>> The the
I thought you were going to be like, "Oh
good, we're going to like no longer have
the bull jobs." Like, "No, all jobs will
be bull."
>> I think that's where we're sort of
heading, right? It's like the
relationship building, all of that.
>> I like that take.
>> All right. Well, shall we leave it
there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the
Oddlots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at The Stalwart. Follow our guest
Alex Emas. He's Alex Oleg Emas. Follow
our producers Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Arman, Dash Bennett at Dashbot, and Kil
Brooks at Kil Brooks.
>> And for more Oddlots content, you can
check out newsletter that is at
bloomberg.com/oddlots.
>> And you can chat about all of these
topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/oddlots.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please like the video or leave a
comment or better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.
>> [music]
[music]